---
layout: post
title:  "Quick Intro to Galois Theory: Part-3"
date:   2026-01-14
categories: [math]
mathjax: true
---
**Link to the previous parts: [Part-1](galois-1.html) [Part-2](galois-2.html)**

# Lagrange Resolvent

In this section, we unify the solution methods used for solving the quadratic, cubic and quartic equations.

Let $\alpha$ be a primitive $n^{th}$ root of unity. For $n \leq 4$, we have:
1. For $n=2$, $\alpha=-1$.
2. For $n=3$, $\alpha=\omega, \omega^2$ and is a root of the quadratic equation $x^2 + x + 1 = 0$
3. For $n=4$, $\alpha=i, -i$ and is a root of the quadratic equation $x^2 + 1 = 0$

Instead of solving the $n^{th}$ degree polynomial $f(x)$ with roots
$r_1$, $r_2$, $\ldots$, $r_n$, let us try solving for a polynomial
$g(x)$ whose roots are
$t = r_1 + \alpha r_2 + \alpha^2 r_3 + \ldots + \alpha^{n-2} r_{n-1} + \alpha^{n-1} r_n$
formed by the $n!$ permutations of the $n$ roots $r_1$, $r_2$, $\ldots$,
$r_n$. Hence $g(x)$ is a $n!$ degree polynomial. $t$ is called the
Lagrange Resolvent. From the previous section, we observe that this
method seems to work for degree $2$ and degree $3$ equations. Degree $4$
seems to use a different resolvent.

## Resolvent Polynomial

$g(x)$ is called the resolvent polynomial. For the polynomials that we
have tried solving so far, the resolvent polynomial always had
coefficients that can be expressed using known values (coefficients of
$f$). Here is why this happens. Let the roots of $g$ be $t_1$, $t_2$,
$\ldots$, $t_{n!}$. The coefficients of $g$ are elementary symmetric
polynomials in $t_i$. Any symmetric polynomial in $t_i$ is also
symmetric in $r_i\text{s}$, since permuting $r_i\text{s}$ only permutes $t_i\text{s}$. Thus,
the coefficients of $g$ are symmetric polynomials in $r_i\text{s}$ and are
hence known quantities.

For the polynomials that we have tried solving so far, the resolvent
polynomial has also been solvable. Here is how this works for degree $2$
and degree $3$ polynomials.

## Solving quadratic with Lagrange Resolvent

For the quadratic polynomial $f(x) = (x-r_1)(x-r_2)$, the resolvents are

$$t_1 = r_1 - r_2$$

$$t_2 = r_2 - r_1$$

The resolvent polynomial
$g(x) = (x-t_1)(x-t_2)$ is also a quadratic. However, in this case,
$t_1 = -t_2$.

$$g(x) = (x-t_1)(x + t_1) = x^2 - t_1^2$$

This is a
simpler quadratic that lacks the linear term and can be solved with only
a square root. Solving this, gives two possible values of $t_1$, one
corresponding to $r_1- r_2$ and the other corresponding to $r_2- r_1$.
We can choose any one of these without loss of generality. Let us say
our choice corresponds to $t_1 = r_1 - r_2$. Since we know $r_1 + r_2$
and $r_1 - r_2$, we can solve this linear system to get $r_1$ and $r_2$.

## Solving cubic with Lagrange Resolvent

For the cubic polynomial $f(x) = (x-r_1)(x-r_2)(x-r_3)$, the resolvents
are

$$t_1 = r_1 + \omega r_2 + \omega^2 r_3$$

$$t_2 = r_3 + \omega r_1 + \omega^2 r_2$$

$$t_3 = r_2 + \omega r_3 + \omega^2 r_1$$

$$t_4 = r_1 + \omega r_3 + \omega^2 r_2$$

$$t_5 = r_2 + \omega r_1 + \omega^2 r_3$$

$$t_6 = r_3 + \omega r_2 + \omega^2 r_1$$

The resolvent polynomial
$g(x) = \prod_{i=1}^{6} (x-t_i)$ is a $6^{th}$ degree polynomial.
However, in this case, $t_2 = \omega t_1$, $t_3 = \omega^2 t_1$ and
similarly $t_5 = \omega t_4$, $t_6 = \omega^2 t_4$.

$$g(x) = (x-t_1)(x-\omega t_1)(x-\omega^2 t_1)(x-t_4)(x-\omega t_4)(x-\omega^2 t_4)$$

$$g(x) = (x^3-t_1^3)(x^3-t_4^3)$$

where:

$$t_1 = r_1 + \omega r_2 + \omega^2 r_3$$

$$t_4 = r_1 + \omega r_3 + \omega^2 r_2$$

This is actually a quadratic
in $x^3$ and can be solved using the above method. We observe that any
odd permutation of the roots $r_1$, $r_2$, $r_3$ maps $t_1^3$ to $t_4^3$
(and vice versa). Any even permutation of the roots $r_1$, $r_2$, $r_3$
maps $t_1^3$ to $t_4^3$ itself. Hence, the two roots of the quadratic
equation $g(x) = (x^3-t_1^3)(x^3-t_4^3)$ can be assigned to
$t_1^3, t_4^3$ in any order. 

From this, we can recover $t_1$ using a cube root. There are $3$ possible cube roots, which are equivalent to cyclic permutations (or the 3 even permutations) of the roots. 

Once we know $t_1$, we can recover the corresponding $t_4$ since $t_1t_4 = (r_1 + \omega r_2 + \omega^2 r_3)(r_1 + \omega r_3 + \omega^2 r_2)$ is a symmetric polynomial in the roots and is hence a known quantity. From

$$
\begin{align*}
t_1 &= r_1 + \omega r_2 + \omega^2 r_3\\
t_4 &=r_1 + \omega r_3 + \omega^2 r_2\\
-a &= r_1 + r_2 + r_3
\end{align*}
$$

we can solve for the individual roots by solving the system of linear equations.

## Solving quartic with Lagrange Resolvent

In the previous section, we showed that the quartic can be solved using
the resolvent:

$$t_1 = r_1r_2 + r_3r_4$$

$$t_2 = r_1r_3 + r_2r_4$$

$$t_3 = r_1r_4 + r_2r_3$$

The resulting resolvent polynomial is a cubic.
Solving this, followed by solving a few quadratic equations solves the
quartic polynomial. 

Alternatively, we can also solve the quartic using the Lagrange
Resolvent $t = r_1 + ir_2 - r_3 - ir_4$. Similar to the cubic case, the
resolvent polynomial in this case can be written as:

$$g(x) = (x^4-t_1^4)(x^4-t_2^4)(x^4-t_3^4)(x^4-t_4^4)(x^4-t_5^4)(x^4-t_6^4)$$

This is a $24^{th}$ degree equation, but a $6^{th}$ degree equation in
$x^4$, where:

$$t_1 = (r_1 - r_2) + i(r_3  - r_4)$$

$$t_2 = (r_1 - r_2) + i(r_4  - r_3)$$

$$t_3 = (r_1 - r_3) + i(r_4  - r_2)$$

$$t_4 = (r_1 - r_3) + i(r_2  - r_4)$$

$$t_5 = (r_1 - r_4) + i(r_2  - r_3)$$

$$t_6 = (r_1 - r_4) + i(r_3  - r_2)$$

This is a $6^{th}$ degree
polynomial that we do not know how to solve. Instead of solving the
resolvent polynomial directly, we go on to solve other auxilary
polynomials. We observe that:

$$t_1t_2 = (r_1 - r_2)^2 + (r_3  - r_4)^2 = r_1^2 + r_2^2 + r_3^2 + r_4^2 - 2(r_1r_2 + r_3r_4)$$

$$t_3t_4 = (r_1 - r_3)^2 + (r_4  - r_2)^2 = r_1^2 + r_2^2 + r_3^2 + r_4^2 - 2(r_1r_3 + r_2r_4)$$

$$t_5t_6 = (r_1 - r_4)^2 + (r_2  - r_3)^2 = r_1^2 + r_2^2 + r_3^2 + r_4^2 - 2(r_1r_4 + r_2r_3)$$

$t_1t_2, t_3t_4, t_5t_6$ are roots of a cubic polynomial with known
coefficients and can be solved. This is similar to the cubic polynomial with roots $(r_1r_2+r_3r_4, r_1r_3+r_2r_4, r_1r_4+r_2r_3)$ used in solving the quartic in the previous section. 

We also observe that:

$$
\begin{align*}
t_1^2 - t_2^2 &= 4i(r_1 - r_2)(r_3  - r_4)\\
              &= 4i(r_1r_3+r_2r_4)-4i(r_1r_4+r_2r_3)\\
              &= 2i(t_5t_6-t_3t_4)
\end{align*}
$$

This means that once we know
$t_1t_2$, $t_3t_4$, $t_5t_6$, by solving the auxilary cubic equation, we also know $t_1^2 - t_2^2$, $t_3^2 - t_4^2$, $t_5^2 - t_6^2$. Thus, by solving the auxilary cubic equation, we can factorize $g(x)$ further into $6$ factors:

$$g(x) =$$

$$\big( (x^2-t_1^2)(x^2+t_2^2) \big) \hspace{5mm}  \big( (x^2-t_3^2)(x^2+t_4^2) \big) \hspace{5mm} \big( (x^2-t_5^2)(x^2+t_6^2) \big) \hspace{5mm}$$

$$\big( (x^2+t_1^2)(x^2-t_2^2) \big) \hspace{5mm} \big( (x^2+t_3^2)(x^2-t_4^2) \big) \hspace{5mm} \big( (x^2+t_5^2)(x^2-t_6^2) \big) \hspace{5mm}$$

Each factor is a polynomial with known coefficients. Each of them is a
quadratic in $x^2$. We can solve each of these quadratics to get
$t_1^2$, $t_2^2$, $t_3^2$, $t_4^2$, $t_5^2$, and $t_6^2$. This helps us
factorize $g(x)$ fully into its $12$ factors of the form
$(x^2 - t_i^2)$.

We can recover $t_i\text{s}$ by taking the square roots. There are two possible
roots in each case. However, once we fix $t_1$, we can find the
corresponding $t_2$ since we already know $t_1t_2$. Similarly, once we
fix $t_3$, we can find the corresponding $t_4$. Similarly for $t_5$ and
$t_6$. The three choices of signs of $t_1, t_3, t_5$ have to be aligned
such that:

$$t_1 + t_3 + t_5 = t_2 + t_4 + t_6$$

But we still need to
distinguish between $(t_1, t_2)$ and $(t_2, t_1)$ and similarly for the
other two pairs. We can do this by observing that:

$$(t_1 + it_2)(t_3 + it_4)(t_5 + it_6)$$

$$=(1+i)^3(r_1+r_2-r_3-r_4)(r_1+r_3-r_4-r_2)(r_1+r_4-r_2-r_3)$$

is symmetric in the roots $r_1$, $r_2$, $r_3$, $r_4$ and is a known
quantity. With these restriction, all $t_i\text{s}$ get fixed. From these, the
roots can be solved using a system of linear equations.

## Roots of unity with Lagrange Resolvent

We can solve for any primitive root of unity using Lagrange Resolvent, going beyond the quartic equation.

We know that the primitive $n^{th}$ root of unity satisfies

$$x^{n-1} + x^{n-2} + \ldots + x^2 + x +1=0$$

We also know that if $n$
is not a prime with $n=ab$ where $1<a<n$ and $1<b<n$, the $n^{th}$
primitive root of unity is a product of the $a^{th}$ primitive root of
unity and $b^{th}$ primitive root of unity. Hence, to solve for primitve
roots of unity, it is enough to consider cases where $n = p$ is a prime.

Let the roots of this polynomial be $\alpha$, $\alpha^2$, $\alpha^3$,
$\ldots$, $\alpha^{p-1}$. This can also be arranged in a slightly
different order: $\alpha$, $\alpha^g$, $\alpha^{g^2}$, $\ldots$,
$\alpha^{g^{p-2}}$ for some $g<p$. This is always possible due to a result in number
theory. There always exists a generator $g$ such that $g^i$ mod($p$)
generates all of $1,2,3,\ldots, p-1$ (mod $p$). The resolvent
corresponding to this order is:

$$t = \alpha + \beta\alpha^g + \beta^2\alpha^{g^2} + \ldots + \beta^{p-2}\alpha^{g^{p-2}}$$

where $\beta$ is a primitive $(p-1)^{th}$ root of unity. We assume
$\beta$ to be a known quantity. The resolvent polynomial of degree $(p-1)!$ would have a factor of the form $(x^{p-1} - t^{p-1})$. Generally, $t^{p-1}$ is not a known value (as shown in the case of
the general quartic case). But in the case of the above polynomial, this
factor is expressible in terms of known values. 

When $t^{p-1}=(\alpha + \beta\alpha^g + \beta^2\alpha^{g^2} + \ldots + \beta^{p-2}\alpha^{g^{p-2}})^{p-1}$ is expanded in terms of $\alpha$ and $\beta$, it can be expressed as a polynomial in $\alpha$ whose coefficients are polynomials in $\beta$:

$$t^{p-1} = P_0(\beta) + P_1(\beta)\alpha + P_2(\beta)\alpha^g + P_3(\beta)\alpha^{g^2}+ \ldots + P_{p-1}(\beta)\alpha^{g^{p-2}}$$

When $\alpha$ is replaced by $\alpha^g$ in the above, $t$ becomes
$t/\beta$. The left hand side remains unchanged since
$(t/\beta)^{p-1} = t^{p-1}$. On the right hand side, this implies
$P_1(\beta) = P_2(\beta) = \ldots =P_{p-1}(\beta)$. This gives:

$$t^{p-1} = P_0(\beta) + P_1(\beta)(\alpha + \alpha^g + \alpha^{g^2}+ \ldots + \alpha^{g^{p-2}}) = P_0(\beta) - P_1(\beta)$$

Hence, $t^{p-1}$ is a known quantity.

Once we know $t$ we can solve for the individual roots. Here is a sketch
of the method. Consider the quantities:

$$u_1 = \alpha + \beta\alpha^g + \beta^2\alpha^{g^2} + \ldots + \beta^{p-2}\alpha^{g^{p-2}}$$

$$u_2 = \alpha + \beta^2\alpha^g + \beta^4\alpha^{g^2} + \ldots + \beta^{2(p-2)}\alpha^{g^{p-2}}$$

$$\vdots$$

$$u_k = \alpha + \beta^k\alpha^g + \beta^{2k}\alpha^{g^2} + \ldots + \beta^{k(p-2)}\alpha^{g^{p-2}}$$

$$\vdots$$

$$u_{p-1} = \alpha + \beta^{p-1}\alpha^g + \beta^{2({p-1})}\alpha^{g^2} + \ldots + \beta^{(p-1)(p-2)}\alpha^{g^{p-2}}$$

We see that $u_1 = t$ is a known quantity.
$u_{p-1} = \alpha + \alpha^g + \alpha^{g^2} + \ldots + \alpha^{g^{p-2}} = -1$
is also a known quantity. In general, any $u_iu_1^{p-1-i}$ can be shown
to be a known quantity by the exact same method as in showing $t^{p-1}$
to be a known quantity. Once we find all $u_i\text{s}$, we can solve for
$\alpha$ from the system of linear equations.

## Lagrange Theorem on Resolvents

So far, we have observed that, once we have solved the resolvent polynomial $g(x)$, we can find the roots of the polynomial $f(x)$.

**Theorem**: Suppose $t$ is an expression in terms of the roots and known quantities,
and $u$ is another expression in roots and known quantities. Let us
evaluate all possible values of $t$ and $u$ under the various root
permutations. If it so happens that the root permutations that change the
value of $u$ also change the value of $t$, then $u$ can be expressed
using $t$ and other known values.

**Proof**: Let us assume there are $k$ different values that $u$ can
take under the root permutations: $u_1$, $u_2$, $u_3$, $\ldots$, $u_k$.
Let the corresponding values of $t$ be $t_1$, $t_2$, $t_3$, $\ldots$,
$t_k$. Consider the following:

$$u_1 + u_2 + \ldots + u_k$$

$$t_1u_1 + t_2u_2 + \ldots + t_ku_k$$

$$t_1^2u_1 + t_2^2u_2 + \ldots + t_k^2u_k$$

$$t_1^3u_1 + t_2^3u_2 + \ldots + t_k^3u_k$$

$$\vdots$$

$$t_1^{k-1}u_1 + t_2^{k-1}u_2 + \ldots + t_k^{k-1}u_k$$

All these expressions are symmetric in roots and are known quantities.
Hence, $u_1$ can be expressed in terms of $t_i^j$:

$$u_1 = \frac{D_1}{D} = \frac{D_1D}{D^2}$$

where D is the Vandermonde
Determinant, $D^2 = \prod (t_i - t_j)^2$. $D^2$ is symmetric in $t_i$
and hence symmetric in roots and is a known quantity. $D_1$ is same as D
but $t_1^j$ is replaced with the value of the $j^{th}$ expression in the
above system of equations. Hence, the numerator is a polynomial in $t_1$
whose coefficients are symmetric polynomials in $t_2$, $t_3$, $\ldots$,
$t_k$, which in turn can be expressed as polynomials in $t_1$. Hence
$u_1$ can be expressed as polynomial in $t_1$ (with coefficients being
known quantities).

If we can find a $t$ such that it takes $n!$ different values under root
permutations, we have got our resolvent. Indeed, such a resolvent can
always be formed using a linear combination of roots. For such a linear
combination to not change under some permutation requires the coefficients to satisfy elaborate constraints. Finding all such constraints for our
given polynomial and then choosing coefficients that violate these
constraints provides us the resolvent. We have not only proved the
existence of a resolvent, but also a resolvent that is linear in the
roots.

Here is a summary of what we know so far:

1.  We can create a new variable $t$ called the resolvent which is
    expressed entirely using the roots of the polynomial and known
    quantities (like coefficients of the polynomial and roots of unity).

2.  $t$ can be expressed as a root of a polynomial with known
    coefficients. We have been able to solve this polynomial so far in
    the cases that we have explored. Though, this is not always
    guaranteed.

3.  Once we find $t$, we can obtain all the roots using known
    quantities.

4.  We can always find a $t$ that is linear in roots. Lagrange Resolvent is one such resolvent. For polynomials of degree $2$ and $3$, the resolvent polynomial can be directly solved. For polynomials of degree $4$, the resolvent polynomial can not be directly solved. However, by solving an auxilary cubic polynomial, the resolvent polynomial can be factorized into simpler polynomials, that can then be solved. The resolvent method can also be used for solving for primitive roots of unity. 

**Continue Reading: [Part-4](galois-4.html) ...**